This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer please visit www.librivox.org
Today's reading by Alex Foster www.alexfoster.me.uk
Dracula by Bram Stoker
Chapter 19
Jonathan Harker's Journal
1st October, 5am
I went with the party to the search with an easy mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well.
I'm so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at all,
but now that her work is done and that it is due to her energy and brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way that every point tells,
she may well feel that her part is finished and she can henceforth leave the rest to us.
We were, I think, all a little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield.
When we came away from his room we were silent till we got back to the study.
Then Mr. Morrie said to Dr. Seward,
Say Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff he is about the sanest lunatic I ever saw.
I'm not sure, but I believe he had some serious purpose, and if he had it was pretty rough on him not to get a chance.
Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added,
Friend John, you know more about lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been me to decide I would before that last hysterical outburst have given him free.
But we live and learn, and in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincy would say.
All is best as they are.
Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way,
I don't know but that I agree with you.
If that man had been an ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him,
but he seemed so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I'm afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads.
I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat,
then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth.
Besides, he called the Count Lord and Master, and he may want to get out and help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and rats in his own kind to help him,
so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic.
He certainly did seem earnest though.
I only hope we have done what is best.
These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man.
The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on his shoulder, said in his grave kindly way,
Friend John, have no fear.
We are trying to do our duty in a very sad and terrible case.
We can only do as we deem best.
What else have we to hope for, except the pity of the good God?
Lord Godolming had slipped away for a few minutes, but now he returned.
He held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked.
That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call.
Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house,
taking care to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out.
When we got to the porch, the Professor opened his bag,
and took out a lot of things which he laid on the step,
sorting them into four little groups, evidently one for each.
Then he spoke.
My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of many kinds.
Our enemy is not merely spiritual.
Remember that he has the strengths of twenty men,
and that though our necks or our windpipes are of the common kind,
and therefore breakable or crushable, his are not amenable to mere strength.
A stronger man or a body of men, more strong in all than him,
can at certain times hold him, but they cannot hurt him as we can be hurt by him.
We must therefore guard ourselves from his touch.
Keep this near your heart.
As he spoke, he lifted a small silver crucifix,
and held it out to me, I being nearest to him.
Put these flowers round your neck.
Here he handed me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms.
For other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife,
and for aiding all these so small electrical lamps which you can fasten to your breast,
and for all and above all at the last, this which we must not desecrate needless.
This was a portion of sacred wafer which he put in an envelope and handed to me.
Each of the others were similarly equipped.
Now, he said, friend John, where are the skeleton keys?
If we can open the door, we need not break into the house by the window as before at Miss Lucy's.
Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon,
standing him in good stead.
Presently he got one to suit.
After a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and with a rusty clang shot back.
We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened.
It was startling like the image conveyed to me in Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb.
I fancied that the same idea appeared to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back.
The professor was the first to move forward, and he stepped into the open door.
In manus tuas domine, he said, crossing himself as we passed over the threshold.
We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road.
The professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit.
Then we all lit our lamps and proceeded on our search.
The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms as the rays crossed each other,
or the opacity of our bodies through great shadows.
I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there was someone else amongst us.
I suppose it was the recollection so powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings of that terrible experience in Transylvania.
I think the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.
The whole place was thick with dust.
The floor was seemingly inches deep, except where there were recent footsteps,
in which on holding down my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked.
The walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of spider's webs,
whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down.
On a table in the hall was a great bunch of keys with a time-yellowed label on each.
They had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the professor lifted them.
He turned to me and said, You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know it at least more than we do.
Which is the way to the chapel?
I had an idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been able to get admission to it,
so I led the way, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
This is the spot, said the professor as he turned his lamp on a small map of the house,
copied from the file of my original correspondence regarding the purchase.
With a little trouble we found the key on the bunch and opened the door.
We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps.
But none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered.
None of the others had met the Count at all at the close quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting stage of his existence in his rooms,
or when he was bloated with fresh blood in a ruined building open to the air.
But here the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul.
There was an earthy smell as of some dry miasma which came through the foul air.
But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it?
It was not alone that it was composed of all the ills and mortality, and with the pungent, acrid smell of blood,
but it seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt.
Ugh, it sickens me to think of it.
Every breath exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and intensified its loathsomeness.
Under ordinary circumstances, such a stench would have brought our enterprise to an end.
But this was no ordinary case, and the high and terrible purpose in which we were involved
gave us a strength which rose above merely physical considerations.
After the involuntary shrinking consequent on the first nauseous whiff,
we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.
We made an accurate examination of the place, the professor saying as we began,
the first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left.
We must then examine every hole and corner and cranny,
and see if we cannot get some clue as to what has become of the rest.
A glance was sufficient to show how many remained,
for the great earth chests were bulky and there was no mistaking them.
There were only 29 left out of the 50.
Once I got a fright, for seeing Lord Godalning suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted door
into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my heart stood still.
Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to see the highlights of the Count's evil face,
the ridge of the nose, the red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor.
It was only for a moment, for as Lord Godalning said,
I thought I saw a face, but it was only the shadows,
and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction and stepped into the passage.
There was no sign of anyone, and as there were no corners, no doors,
no aperture of any kind but only the solid walls of the passage,
there could be no hiding place even for him.
I took it that fear had helped imagination and said nothing.
A few moments later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner which he was examining.
We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us,
and we saw a whole mass of phosphorescence which twinkled like stars.
We all instinctively drew back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.
For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalning,
who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency.
Rushing over to the great iron-bound oaken door which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock,
drew the huge bolts and swung the door open.
Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low shrill call.
It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs,
and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door,
and as we moved I noticed that the dust had been much disturbed.
The boxes which had been taken out had been brought this way.
But even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased.
They seemed to swarm over the place all at once,
till the lamplight shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering baleful eyes
made the place look like a bank of earth set with fireflies.
The dogs dashed on but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled,
and then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion.
The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.
Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs and, carrying him in, placed him on the floor.
The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to recover his courage and rushed at his natural enemies.
They fled before him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score,
the other dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner,
had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished.
With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed,
for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes,
and turned them over and over and tossed them in the air with vicious shakes.
We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of the chapel door,
or the relief we experienced by finding ourselves in the open, I know not,
but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to slip from us like a robe,
and the occasion of our coming lost something of its grim significance,
though we did not slacken the wit in our resolution.
We closed the outer door and barred and locked it,
and bringing the dogs with us began our search of the house.
We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions,
and all untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness,
and even when we returned to the chapel they frisked about
as though they had been rabbit hunting in a summer wood.
The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall door from the bunch
and locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket when he had done.
So far, he said, our night has been eminently successful.
No harm has come to us such as I feared might be,
and yet we have ascertained how many boxes are missing.
More than all do I rejoice that this, our first and perhaps our most difficult
and dangerous step has been accomplished,
without bringing there into our most sweet madame Mina,
or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds
and smells of horror which she might never forget.
One lesson, too, we have learned, if it be allowable to argue a particularity,
that the brute beasts which are at the Count's command
are yet themselves not amenable to his spiritual power,
for look, these rats that would come to his call just as from his castle top
he summoned the wolves to your going and to that poor mother's cry,
though they come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs my friend Arthur.
We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears, and that monster.
He has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time tonight,
so be it that he has gone elsewhere.
Good, it has given us opportunity to cry check in some ways in this check game
which we play for the sake of human souls.
Now let us go home, the dawn is close at hand
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work.
It may be ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril,
but we must go on and from no danger shall we shrink.
The house was silent when we got back,
save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the distant wards
and a low moaning sound from Renfield's room.
The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself after the manner of the insane
with needless thoughts of pain.
I came tiptoe into our own room and found Mina asleep,
breathing so softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it.
She looks paler than usual.
I hope the meeting tonight has not upset her.
I am truly thankful that she is to be left out of our future work
and even of our deliberations.
It is too great a strain for a woman to bear.
I did not think so at first but I know better now.
Therefore I am glad that it is settled.
There may be things which would frighten her to hear
and yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her
if once she suspected that there was any concealment.
Henceforth our work is to be a sealed book to her
till at least such time as we can tell her that all is finished
and the earth free from a monster of the netherworld.
I dare say it would be difficult to begin to keep silence after such confidence as ours
but I must be resolute and tomorrow I shall keep dark over tonight's doings
and shall refuse to speak of anything that has happened.
I rest on the sofa so as not to disturb her.
First of October, later.
I suppose it was natural that we should all have overslept ourselves
for the day was a busy one and the night had no rest at all.
Even Mina must have felt his exhaustion
for though I slept till the sun was high I was awake before her
and had to call two or three times before she awoke.
Indeed she was so sound asleep that for a few seconds she did not recognise me
but looked at me with a sort of blank terror
as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream.
She complained a little of being tired and I let her rest till later in the day.
We now know of 21 boxes having been removed
and if it be that several were taken in any of these removals
we may be able to trace them all.
Such will of course immensely simplify our labour
and the sooner the matter is attended to the better.
I shall look up Thomas Snelling today.
Dr. Seward's diary
1st of October. It was towards noon
when I was awakened by the professor walking into my room.
He was more jolly and cheerful than usual
and it is quite evident that last night's work
has helped take some of the brooding weight off his mind.
After going over the adventure of the night he suddenly said
your patient interests me much.
May it be that with you I visit him this morning
or if that you are too occupied I can go alone if it may be.
It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic
who talks philosophy and reason so sound.
I had some work to do which pressed
so I told him that if he would go alone I would be glad
as then I should not have to keep him waiting.
So I called an attendant and gave him the necessary instructions.
Before the professor left the room
I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient.
But, he answered, I want to talk to him of himself
and of his delusion as to consuming live things.
He said to Madame Mina as I see in your diary of yesterday
that he had once had such a belief.
Why do you smile, friend John?
Excuse me, I said, but the answer is here.
I laid my hand on the tight written matter.
When Arsene and Learned Lunatic made that very statement
of how he used to consume life
his mouth was actually nauseous with the flies and spiders
which he had eaten just before Mrs Harker entered the room.
Van Helsing smiled in turn.
Good, he said, your memory is true, friend John.
I should have remembered.
And yet it is this very obliquity of thought and memory
which makes mental disease such a fascinating study.
Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the folly of this madman
than I shall from teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?
I went on with my work and before long was through that in hand.
It seemed that the time had been very short indeed.
But there was Van Helsing back in the study.
Do I interrupt? he asked politely as he stood at the door.
Not at all, I answered. Come in.
My work is finished and I am free.
I can go with you now if you like.
It is needless. I have seen him.
Well?
I fear that he does not appraise me at much.
Our interview was short.
When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre
with his elbows on his knees
and his face was the picture of sullen discontent.
I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could
and with such a measure of respect as I could assume.
He made no reply whatever.
Don't you know me? I asked.
His answer was not reassuring.
I know you well enough.
You are the old fool Van Helsing.
I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else.
Damn all thick-headed Dutchman!
Not a word more would he say
but sat in his implacable sullenness
as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at all.
Thus departed for this time
my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic.
So I shall go, if I may,
and cheer myself with a few happy words
with that sweet soul, Madame Mina.
Friend John, it does rejoice me unspeakably
that she is no more to be pained
no more to be worried with our terrible things.
Though we shall much miss her help
it is better so.
I agree with you
with all my heart, I answered earnestly
for I did not want him to weaken in this matter.
Mrs Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us
all men of the world
and who have been in many tight places in our time
but it is no place for a woman
and if she had remained in touch with the affair
it would in time infallibly have wrecked her.
So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs Harker
and Harker.
Quincy and Art are all out following up the clues
as to the earth boxes.
I shall finish my round of work
and we shall meet tonight.
Mina Harker's journal
1st of October
It is strange to me
to be kept in the dark as I am today
after Jonathan's full confidence
for so many years
to see him manifestly avoid certain matters
and those are the most vital of all.
This morning I slept late
after the fatigues of yesterday
and though Jonathan was late too he was the earlier.
He spoke to me before he went out
never more sweetly or tenderly
but he never mentioned a word
of what had happened in the visit to the Count's house
and yet he must have known
how terribly anxious I was.
Poor dear fellow!
I suppose it must have distressed him
even more than it did me.
They all agreed that it was best
that I should not be drawn further into this awful work
and I acquiesced
but to think that he keeps anything from me
and now I am crying like a silly fool
when I know it comes from my husband's great love
and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.
That has done me good.
Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all
and lest it should ever be
that he should think for a moment
that I kept anything from him
I still keep my journal as usual.
Then, if he is feared of my trust
I shall show it to him with every thought of my heart
put down for his dear eyes to read.
I feel strangely sad
and low-spirited today.
I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible excitement.
Last night I went to bed
when the men had gone
simply because they told me to.
I didn't feel sleepy
and I did feel full of devouring anxiety.
I kept thinking over everything that has been
ever since Jonathan came to see me in London
and it all seems like a horrible tragedy
with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end.
Everything that one does seems, no matter how right it may be
to bring on the very thing which is most to be deplored.
If I hadn't gone to Whitby perhaps
poor dear Lucy would be with us now.
She hadn't taken to visiting the church out till I came
and if she hadn't come there in the daytime with me
she wouldn't have walked in her sleep
and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep
that monster wouldn't have destroyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby?
There now, crying again.
I wonder what has come over me today.
I must hide it from Jonathan
for if he knew that I had been crying twice in one morning
I, who never cried on my own account
and whom he has never caused to shed a tear
the dear fellow would fret his heart out.
I shall put a bold face on
and if I do feel weepy
he shall never see it.
I suppose it is just one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn.
I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night.
I remember hearing the sudden
barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds
like praying on a very tumultuous
scale from Mr. Renfield's room
which is somewhere under this.
And then there was silence over everything
silence so profound
that it startled me and I got up
and looked out of the window.
All was dark and silent
the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own.
Not a thing seemed to be stirring
but all to be grim
and fixed as death or fate
so that a thin streak of white mist
that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house
seemed to have a sentience and a vitality
of its own.
I think that the digression of my thoughts
must have done me good, for when I got back to bed
I found a lethargy creeping over me.
I lay a while but could not quite sleep
so I got out and looked out
of the window again.
The mist was spreading and was now close up to the house
so that I could see it lying thick
against the wall as though it was
stealing up to the windows.
The poor man was more loud than ever
and though I could not distinguish a word he said
I could in some way recognize in his
tones some passionate entreaty on
his part.
Then there was the sound of a struggle
and I knew that the attendants were dealing with him.
I was so frightened
that I crept into bed and pulled the clothes
over my head putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy
at least so I thought
but I must have fallen asleep
for except dreams I do not remember anything
until the morning when Jonathan woke me.
I think that it took me an effort
and a little time to realize where I was
and that it was Jonathan who was bending over me.
My dream
was very peculiar and was almost typical
of the way that waking thoughts become merged
in or continued in dreams.
I thought that
I was asleep and waiting for Jonathan to come
back. I was very anxious
about him and I was powerless to act.
My feet and my hands and my brain were
weighted so that nothing could proceed
at the usual pace
and so I slept uneasily and thought.
Then it began to dawn upon
me that the air was heavy and dank and
cold. I put back the clothes
from my face and found to my surprise that all
was dim around. The gaslight
which I had left lit for Jonathan
but turned down came only
like a tiny red spark through the
fog which had evidently grown thicker
and poured into the room.
Then it occurred to me that I had shut the
window before I had come to bed.
I would have got out to make certain on the point
but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain
my limbs and even my will.
I lay still and endured.
That was all. I closed
my eyes but could still see through my eyelids.
It is wonderful what tricks our dreams
players and how conveniently we can imagine.
The mist
grew thicker and thicker and I could see
now how it came in for I could see it
like smoke or with the white energy
of boiling water pouring in
not through the window but through the joinings
of the door. It got thicker
and thicker till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar
of cloud in the room through the top
of which I could see the light of the gas
shining like a red eye.
Things began to whirl through my brain
just as the cloudy column was now whirling
in the room and through it all
came the scriptural words
a pillar of cloud by day and of fire
by night.
Was it indeed such spiritual guidance
that was coming to me in my sleep?
But the pillar was composed of both
the day and the night guiding for the fire
was in the red eye which at the thought
got a new fascination for me till as I looked
the fire divided and seemed
to shine on me through the fog like two red eyes
such as Lucy told me of in her momentary
mental wandering when on the cliff
the dying sunlight struck the windows
of St Mary's Church.
Suddenly the horror burst upon
me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women
growing into reality through the whirling
mist in the moonlight and in my
dream I must have fainted for all became
black darkness.
The last conscious effort which my imagination
made was to show me a
livid white face bending over me
out of the mist.
I must be careful of such dreams
for they would unseat one's reason if there
were too much of them.
I would get Dr. Van Helsing
or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me
which would make me sleep only that
I fear to alarm them.
Such a dream at the present time would become
woven into their fears for me.
Tonight I shall strive hard to sleep
naturally. If I do not
I shall tomorrow night get them to give me a dose
of chloral that cannot hurt me for once
and it will give me a good night's sleep.
Last night tired me
more than if I had not slept at all.
Second of October, 10pm
Last night
I slept but did not dream.
I must have slept soundly for
I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed
but the sleep has not refreshed me
for today I feel terribly weak
and spiritless.
I spent all yesterday trying to read
or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield
asked if he might see me.
Poor man he was very gentle
and when I came away he kissed my hand
and bade God bless me.
Some way it affected me much.
I am crying when I think of him.
This is a new weakness
of which I must be careful.
Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had been crying.
He and the others
were out till dinner time
and they all came in tired.
I did what I could to brighten them up
and I suppose that the effort did me good
for I forgot how tired I was.
After dinner they sent me to bed
and all went off to smoke together as they said
but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each other during the day.
I could see from Jonathan's manner
that he had something important to communicate.
I was not so sleepy
as I should have been
so before they went I asked Dr. Stewart
to give me a little opiate of some kind
as I had not slept well the night before.
He very kindly made up a sleeping draft
which he gave to me
telling me that it would do me no harm
as it was very mild.
I have taken it
and am waiting for sleep
which still keeps aloof.
I hope I have not done wrong
for as sleep begins to flirt with me
a new fear comes
that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself
of the power of waking.
I might want it.
Here comes sleep.
Good night.
End of chapter 19
Read in Nottingham, England
on the 28th January 2006
by Alex Foster
www.alexfoster.me.uk